technology/kubernetes/README.adoc, before:

= School Timetabling (OpenShift, Java, Quarkus, Maven)

This demo shows how to use the OptaPlanner Operator to run OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift.

*Please note that the OptaPlanner Operator used in this demo is experimental. As such, it provides no guarantees
in terms of maturity and backward compatibility.*

== Get your environment running

Use an existing OpenShift cluster or https://developers.redhat.com/products/openshift/download[try any of the options] that fit best your needs.

WARNING: The _Developer Sandbox for Red Hat OpenShift_ does not allow installing new operators, thus it's not suitable for running this demo.

WARNING: If you pick the _Red Hat OpenShift Local_, increase the available memory at least to 16 384 MiB
by running `crc config set memory 16384` before you start the local cluster.

Next, install the https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/latest/cli_reference/openshift_cli/getting-started-cli.html[OpenShift CLI (`oc`)]
to be able to interact with the OpenShift cluster.

Login as a user with the `cluster-admin` role using the `oc login` command.

=== Create a project

Create a new project called _demo_ by running `oc new-project demo`.

[#installArtemisCloud]
=== Install ArtemisCloud

The OptaPlanner Operator uses https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] to create ActiveMQ queues, thus, as the first step,
follow the https://artemiscloud.io/docs/help/operator/[documentation] to install the ArtemisCloud operator to your OpenShift instance.

NOTE: The ArtemisCloud operator by default watches for ActiveMQ broker and queue resources in the namespace it has been installed to.

=== Create a broker

After the ArtemisCloud operator has been deployed, https://artemiscloud.io/docs/help/operator/#creating-operator-based-broker-deployments[create a new broker].
The ArtemisCloud distribution comes with several `activemqartemis` example resources you can use as a starting point.

This demo uses the AMQP protocol to send and receive messages.
To enable the AMQP protocol on the broker, add the following acceptor definition in the `activemqartemis` resource `spec`:

[source, yaml]
----
...
spec:
  acceptors:
  - name: amqp
    connectionsAllowed: 100
    port: 5672
    protocols: amqp
...
----

This acceptor allows up to 100 concurrent connections via the AMQP protocol.

=== Install KEDA

https://keda.sh[KEDA] enables dynamic scaling of solver deployments based on the number of incoming requests.

Follow the https://keda.sh/docs/deploy/[documentation] to install the KEDA operator.

=== Deploy the OptaPlanner Operator

Follow the https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner/tree/main/optaplanner-operator#deploy-the-optaplanner-operator[README] to install the OptaPlanner operator.

=== Deploy the Demo App

The Demo App also relies upon the `quarkus-openshift` extension to deploy to OpenShift. The extension also picks up additional
resources defined in the `src/main/kubernetes/openshift.yml`; in this case, there is a template that creates
the PostgreSQL database to store input problems and solutions.

. change directory to `demo-app`
. change the current project to _demo_ by running `oc project demo`
. deploy the demo-app via a maven command: `mvn clean package -Dopenshift -Dquarkus.openshift.namespace=demo -Dquarkus.openshift.env.vars.amqp-host=<ActiveMQ broker host>`

The `-Dquarkus.openshift.env.vars.amqp-host` property results in an environment variable `AMQP_HOST`
in the running container, which Quarkus converts to the `amqp-host` property, effectively overriding the
`amqp-host=localhost` in the `application.properties`.

TIP: If you encounter the `Caused by: javax.net.ssl.SSLHandshakeException: sun.security.validator.ValidatorException: PKIX path building failed` exception due to self-signed certificate during the build, add the `-Dquarkus.kubernetes-client.trust-certs=true` property.

To find out the ActiveMQ broker host:
. run `oc get service`
. find the service bound to the port 5672
. the ActiveMQ broker host is a compound of the `<service name>.<project>.svc.cluster.local`, e.g. `ex-aao-amqp-0-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local`

=== Create the school-timetabling solver

Now, when all the other pieces of the puzzle are already in place, it's time to make the school-timetabling running.

[#buildSolverImage]
==== Build and push the school-timetabling container image

In order for the OptaPlanner Operator to create a deployment of the solver project, you need to push it to any container image registry accessible
by your OpenShift instance.

Quarkus comes in handy again, this time with one of the https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image[Quarkus container image extensions], which
builds a container image locally and pushes it to a container image registry.

Build and push the School Timetabling container image to a registry of your choice:

. change directory to `school-timetabling`
. run `mvn clean package -Dopenshift -Dquarkus.container-image.group=<image group> -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=<container registry>
-Dquarkus.container-image.username=<container registry username> -Dquarkus.container-image.password=<container registry password>`

The container registry in the command above is a repository used to store and access container images (e.g. docker.io) and the image group is an organization or a personal account in that registry.

[TIP]
.Pushing an image to a container image registry
====
You can use https://quay.io[quay.io] as a container image registry.

. open https://quay.io in the browser and login with your Red Hat account
. create a new repository called _school-timetabling_, switch its visibility to _Public_ and click the _Create Public Repository_ button
. the image is identified by quay.io/<login>/<image name>:<tag>
====

==== Create the Solver custom resource

The Solver custom resource describes the problem to solve on OpenShift and the infrastructure it requires.
In this case, the `Solver` custom resource might look like follows:

[source, yaml, linenums]
----
apiVersion: org.optaplanner.solver/v1alpha1
kind: Solver
metadata:
  name: school-timetabling
spec:
  amqBroker:
    host: ex-aao-amqp-0-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local
    port: 5672
    managementHost: ex-aao-hdls-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local
    usernameSecretRef:
      key: AMQ_USER
      name: ex-aao-credentials-secret
    passwordSecretRef:
      key: AMQ_PASSWORD
      name: ex-aao-credentials-secret
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: school-timetabling
          image: quay.io/example/school-timetabling:latest
  scaling:
    dynamic: true
    replicas: 3
----

* line 4 - the solver name
* lines 7 and 8 - ActiveMQ broker host and port accepting AMQP connections
* line 9 - ActiveMQ broker host providing management interface
* lines 10 to 15 - reference to a secret containing a username and password to access the broker
* line 16 to 20 - the school-timetabling container that will run from the image <<#buildSolverImage, built and pushed>> to a registry of your choice
* line 22 - enables dynamic scaling via KEDA
* line 23 - the maximum number of running school-timetabling pods; if dynamic scaling is disabled, this parameter defines a fixed number of pods

To find out the ActiveMQ broker management host:

. run `oc get service`
. find the service bound to the port 8161
. the ActiveMQ broker management host is a compound of the `<service name>.<project>.svc.cluster.local`, e.g. `ex-aao-hdls-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local`

The ActiveMQ broker username and password is stored in a secret named `<broker resource name>-credentials-secret`.
Run `oc get secret` to see the available secrets in the project.

Create the `Solver` resource via `oc apply -f <file>`.

To see what ActiveMQ queue there are in the `demo` project, run `oc get activemqartemisaddress`:

----
$ oc get activemqartemisaddress
NAME                          AGE
school-timetabling-problem    4s
school-timetabling-solution   4s
----

Both the `school-timetabling-problem` and `school-timetabling-solution` have been created.

Check the active pods in the `demo` project by running the `oc get pods` command:

----
$ oc get pod
NAME                                                   READY   STATUS
activemq-artemis-controller-manager-569cdd7f7c-xrfcx   1/1     Running
demo-app-3-t4pkp                                       1/1     Running
ex-aao-ss-0                                            1/1     Running
postgresql-school-timetabling-1-kwdr5                  1/1     Running
----

There are no running `school-timetabling` pods, as no request for solving has been submitted yet.

== Run the demo-app

. find out the Demo App address by running `oc get route`; see the _HOST/PORT_ column of its output
. open the address in the browser
. change the number of lessons, if needed, and click the _Create & send_ button

Check the active pods again:

----
$ oc get pod
NAME                                                   READY   STATUS
activemq-artemis-controller-manager-569cdd7f7c-xrfcx   1/1     Running
demo-app-3-t4pkp                                       1/1     Running
ex-aao-ss-0                                            1/1     Running
postgresql-school-timetabling-1-kwdr5                  1/1     Running
school-timetabling-cb57fc6bd-hvmc6                     0/1     ContainerCreating
school-timetabling-cb57fc6bd-lhn9d                     0/1     ContainerCreating
school-timetabling-cb57fc6bd-tnlw8                     1/1     Running
----

After submitting four datasets for solving, there is one running pod and two others starting, as the maximum number of replicas is three.

== Local development

To work locally on this demo without OpenShift or any Kubernetes cluster:

. start the PostgreSQL database and a Kafka broker by running `docker-compose up`
. run the `demo-app` by `mvn quarkus:dev` in the `demo-app` directory
. run the `school-timetabling` by `mvn quarkus:dev` in the `school-timetabling` directory

Commit message:

PLANNER-2827 Create a setup script for kubernetes demo (#443)
Co-authored-by: Lukáš Petrovický <lukas@petrovicky.net>

technology/kubernetes/README.adoc, after:

= School Timetabling (OpenShift, Java, Quarkus, Maven)

This demo shows how to use the OptaPlanner Operator to run OptaPlanner workloads on OpenShift.

*Please note that the OptaPlanner Operator used in this demo is experimental. As such, it provides no guarantees
in terms of maturity and backward compatibility.*

== Get your environment running

Use an existing OpenShift cluster or https://developers.redhat.com/products/openshift/download[try any of the options] that fit best your needs.

WARNING: The _Developer Sandbox for Red Hat OpenShift_ does not allow installing new operators, thus it's not suitable for running this demo.

WARNING: If you pick the _Red Hat OpenShift Local_, increase the available memory at least to 16 384 MiB
by running `crc config set memory 16384` before you start the local cluster.

Next, install the https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/latest/cli_reference/openshift_cli/getting-started-cli.html[OpenShift CLI (`oc`)]
to be able to interact with the OpenShift cluster.

Login as a user with the `cluster-admin` role using the `oc login` command.

[#setupByScript]
=== Setup and deploy automatically by using the demo.sh script

To set up the demo, run `./demo.sh setup [path to the OptaPlanner distribution]`.

The script installs KEDA, ArtemisCloud, and OptaPlanner operators and creates a single Artemis AMQ broker in the OpenShift cluster.
It also prints information about the Artemis AMQ broker required in the next steps.

=== Install the required operators and deploy the Demo application manually

This section describes a manual set up as an alternative to <<#setupByScript>>.
If you have already set up the demo by the script, proceed to <<#createSolver, creating the school-timetabling solver>>.

==== Create a project

Create a new project called _demo_ by running `oc new-project demo`.

[#installArtemisCloud]
==== Install ArtemisCloud

The OptaPlanner Operator uses https://artemiscloud.io/[ArtemisCloud] to create ActiveMQ queues, thus, as the first step,
follow the https://artemiscloud.io/docs/help/operator/[documentation] to install the ArtemisCloud operator to your OpenShift instance.

NOTE: The ArtemisCloud operator by default watches for ActiveMQ broker and queue resources in the namespace it has been installed to.

==== Create a broker

After the ArtemisCloud operator has been deployed, https://artemiscloud.io/docs/help/operator/#creating-operator-based-broker-deployments[create a new broker].
The ArtemisCloud distribution comes with several `activemqartemis` example resources you can use as a starting point.

This demo uses the AMQP protocol to send and receive messages.
To enable the AMQP protocol on the broker, add the following acceptor definition in the `activemqartemis` resource `spec`:

[source, yaml]
----
...
spec:
  acceptors:
  - name: amqp
    connectionsAllowed: 100
    port: 5672
    protocols: amqp
...
----

This acceptor allows up to 100 concurrent connections via the AMQP protocol.

==== Install KEDA

https://keda.sh[KEDA] enables dynamic scaling of solver deployments based on the number of incoming requests.

Follow the https://keda.sh/docs/deploy/[documentation] to install the KEDA operator.

==== Deploy the OptaPlanner Operator

Follow the https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner/tree/main/optaplanner-operator#deploy-the-optaplanner-operator[README] to install the OptaPlanner operator.

==== Deploy the Demo App

The Demo App also relies upon the `quarkus-openshift` extension to deploy to OpenShift. The extension also picks up additional
resources defined in the `src/main/kubernetes/openshift.yml`; in this case, there is a template that creates
the PostgreSQL database to store input problems and solutions.

. change directory to `demo-app`
. change the current project to _demo_ by running `oc project demo`
. deploy the demo-app via a maven command: `mvn clean package -Dopenshift -Dquarkus.openshift.namespace=demo -Dquarkus.openshift.env.vars.amqp-host=<ActiveMQ broker host>`

The `-Dquarkus.openshift.env.vars.amqp-host` property results in an environment variable `AMQP_HOST`
in the running container, which Quarkus converts to the `amqp-host` property, effectively overriding the
`amqp-host=localhost` in the `application.properties`.

TIP: If you encounter the `Caused by: javax.net.ssl.SSLHandshakeException: sun.security.validator.ValidatorException: PKIX path building failed` exception due to self-signed certificate during the build, add the `-Dquarkus.kubernetes-client.trust-certs=true` property.

To find out the ActiveMQ broker host:
. run `oc get service`
. find the service bound to the port 5672
. the ActiveMQ broker host is a compound of the `<service name>.<project>.svc.cluster.local`, e.g. `ex-aao-amqp-0-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local`

[#createSolver]
=== Create the school-timetabling solver

Now, when all the other pieces of the puzzle are already in place, it's time to make the school-timetabling running.

[#buildSolverImage]
==== Build and push the school-timetabling container image

In order for the OptaPlanner Operator to create a deployment of the solver project, you need to push it to any container image registry accessible
by your OpenShift instance.

Quarkus comes in handy again, this time with one of the https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image[Quarkus container image extensions], which
builds a container image locally and pushes it to a container image registry.

Build and push the School Timetabling container image to a registry of your choice:

. change directory to `school-timetabling`
. run `mvn clean package -Dopenshift -Dquarkus.container-image.group=<image group> -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=<container registry>
-Dquarkus.container-image.username=<container registry username> -Dquarkus.container-image.password=<container registry password>`

The container registry in the command above is a repository used to store and access container images (e.g. docker.io) and the image group is an organization or a personal account in that registry.

[TIP]
.Pushing an image to a container image registry
====
You can use https://quay.io[quay.io] as a container image registry.

. open https://quay.io in the browser and login with your Red Hat account
. create a new repository called _school-timetabling_, switch its visibility to _Public_ and click the _Create Public Repository_ button
. the image is identified by quay.io/<login>/<image name>:<tag>
====

==== Create the Solver custom resource

The Solver custom resource describes the problem to solve on OpenShift and the infrastructure it requires.
In this case, the `Solver` custom resource might look like follows:

[source, yaml, linenums]
----
apiVersion: org.optaplanner.solver/v1alpha1
kind: Solver
metadata:
  name: school-timetabling
spec:
  amqBroker:
    host: ex-aao-amqp-0-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local
    port: 5672
    managementHost: ex-aao-hdls-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local
    usernameSecretRef:
      key: AMQ_USER
      name: ex-aao-credentials-secret
    passwordSecretRef:
      key: AMQ_PASSWORD
      name: ex-aao-credentials-secret
  template:
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: school-timetabling
          image: quay.io/example/school-timetabling:latest
  scaling:
    dynamic: true
    replicas: 3
----

* line 4 - the solver name
* lines 7 and 8 - ActiveMQ broker host and port accepting AMQP connections
* line 9 - ActiveMQ broker host providing management interface
* lines 10 to 15 - reference to a secret containing a username and password to access the broker
* line 16 to 20 - the school-timetabling container that will run from the image <<#buildSolverImage, built and pushed>> to a registry of your choice
* line 22 - enables dynamic scaling via KEDA
* line 23 - the maximum number of running school-timetabling pods; if dynamic scaling is disabled, this parameter defines a fixed number of pods

To find out the ActiveMQ broker management host:

. run `oc get service`
. find the service bound to the port 8161
. the ActiveMQ broker management host is a compound of the `<service name>.<project>.svc.cluster.local`, e.g. `ex-aao-hdls-svc.demo.svc.cluster.local`

The ActiveMQ broker username and password is stored in a secret named `<broker resource name>-credentials-secret`.
Run `oc get secret` to see the available secrets in the project.

Create the `Solver` resource via `oc apply -f <file>`.

To see what ActiveMQ queue there are in the `demo` project, run `oc get activemqartemisaddress`:

----
$ oc get activemqartemisaddress
NAME                          AGE
school-timetabling-problem    4s
school-timetabling-solution   4s
----

Both the `school-timetabling-problem` and `school-timetabling-solution` have been created.

Check the active pods in the `demo` project by running the `oc get pods` command:

----
$ oc get pod
NAME                                                   READY   STATUS
activemq-artemis-controller-manager-569cdd7f7c-xrfcx   1/1     Running
demo-app-3-t4pkp                                       1/1     Running
ex-aao-ss-0                                            1/1     Running
postgresql-school-timetabling-1-kwdr5                  1/1     Running
----

There are no running `school-timetabling` pods, as no request for solving has been submitted yet.

== Run the demo-app

. find out the Demo App address by running `oc get route`; see the _HOST/PORT_ column of its output
. open the address in the browser
. change the number of lessons, if needed, and click the _Create & send_ button

Check the active pods again:

----
$ oc get pod
NAME                                                   READY   STATUS
activemq-artemis-controller-manager-569cdd7f7c-xrfcx   1/1     Running
demo-app-3-t4pkp                                       1/1     Running
ex-aao-ss-0                                            1/1     Running
postgresql-school-timetabling-1-kwdr5                  1/1     Running
school-timetabling-cb57fc6bd-hvmc6                     0/1     ContainerCreating
school-timetabling-cb57fc6bd-lhn9d                     0/1     ContainerCreating
school-timetabling-cb57fc6bd-tnlw8                     1/1     Running
----

After submitting four datasets for solving, there is one running pod and two others starting, as the maximum number of replicas is three.

== Local development

To work locally on this demo without OpenShift or any Kubernetes cluster:

. start the PostgreSQL database and a Kafka broker by running `docker-compose up`
. run the `demo-app` by `mvn quarkus:dev` in the `demo-app` directory
. run the `school-timetabling` by `mvn quarkus:dev` in the `school-timetabling` directory
